PROPOSAL: We use fist-to-5 consensus-based decision making.
---

Template from Code for Boston - feel free to copy!

Repo and Markdown version from OpenEugene - MIT Lincese!

Why
===

To make sure the people who will be doing the work agree on what is being done,
why, and how.

What This Looks Like
====================

Proposals
---------

Proposals should be put forward for decisions that will affect the whole group.
These could be decisions related to project direction, structure, processes,
technologies, etc. The following steps were modified from the “Efficient
Consensus Decision Making” section of *Emergent Strategy* (pp 232-233) by
Adrienne Maree Brown:

1.  Identify the area where a decision is needed and have an exploratory
    conversation to find out where the group’s preferences and concerns are.

2.  Based on that conversation and any additional research, one person or
    sub-group can develop a proposal that represents the discussion.

    1.  Structure a proposal that says what you want to do, why it serves the
        mission/vision of the group, and who/what/when/where/how it will happen.

3.  Send out a written version for people to review in Slack, using the poll
    template shared below. Specify the “respond by” date, providing a minimum of
    1 week to allow for at least one in-person discussion during a weekly
    meetup. Pin the poll in the Slack channel and unpin after voting has
    completed.

4.  Review the proposal together via a thread in Slack and in-person discussion.
    Get responses to any clarifying questions.

5.  Check for agreement by fist-to-five voting (described below).

6.  **Document concerns, amendments, and results of voting in the ‘History’
    section.**

7.  If a proposal gets has been accepted, change document title from PROPOSAL to
    DECISION and unpin from the channel.

Fist-to-Five Voting
-------------------

Fist-to-five voting can be used to check for consensus on written proposals that
affect the whole group, as well as for smaller decisions or temperature checks
on the spot. Through smaller temp checks, fist-to-five voting can even help
inform the development of a larger written proposal.

The outcomes of votes on smaller decisions that do not need a written proposal
should still be documented, as these likely reflect a decision that will help
inform the group or a sub-group going forward.

We can use the following guide both in-person and on Slack:

As explained in [Fist to Five Consensus Building
Process](https://nonprofitgp.files.wordpress.com/2016/05/h03-2016-05-oah-fist-to-five-consensus-building.pdf):

At any point after a decision proposal has been made, you can assess the group's
current position by calling for a show/statement of "Fist to Five." Here is how
to read the responses:

Responses of "four" or "five" mean consensus has been achieved and the proposal
can be considered "approved." The group can now move forward to implementation
of the proposal and/or to the next issue or topic. Ideally, "approval" is
achieved when all responses are at least "three" and mostly "four" and "five."

"Three" - While acceptable, a "three" strongly suggests the need for the
facilitator to ask what else, if anything, can be done for the "three" people to
raise their responses to "four" or "five." Nothing may be needed nor can be
done; however, it is important to clarify whether the "three" indicates a
substantive reservation that needs to be addressed.

"Fist," "one," or "two" - These require additional discussion to determine what
else needs to be considered. Negotiation and compromise may be necessary in
order to raise these responses to a "three" or higher.

The group may be happy to accept any stand asides and go ahead, or it may work
on a new proposal, especially if there are many stand asides.

Fist-to-Five Simple Poll Template for Slack
-------------------------------------------

Follow these steps to generate a poll to check for consensus in Slack.

1.  Copy and paste the entire block below into the \#clean-slate channel in
    Slack.

2.  Replace the specified sections with the proposal summary and reply-by date.
    The date should be at least one week away for written proposals.

3.  For written proposals, provide the link to full proposal in the thread (see
    figure 1 below). For full proposals in Google Docs, the
    sharing settings should be set to “Anyone who has the link can view” to
    allow for easier review. For smaller proposals/temp checks, that line can be
    taken out.

4.  Pin the poll in the Slack channel.

5.  Unpin the poll after voting has completed.

Figure 1: [see markdown template](fist-to-five-template.md) or [slack template](fist-to-five-template.md)

*PROPOSAL: Insert-proposal-summary-here.*
  
Vote or reply in thread with any questions or comments by *insert-date*.
  
See full proposal: insert-link-here

>![5](consensus_5.png): I support the proposal and am willing to be one of the leaders.

>![4](consensus_4.png): I support the proposal and will help implement it.

>![3](consensus_3.png): I’m not in total agreement but am willing to go forward without further discussion.

>![2](consensus_2.png): I still would like to discuss some minor issues.

>![1](consensus_1.png): I still need to discuss certain issues and suggest changes to be made.

>![0](consensus_0.png): I have a fundamental disagreement with the core of the proposal.

>![A](consensus_abstain.png): I will not help implement this idea but don’t want to stop the group. (This could be due to disagreement or lack of time or energy.)

Proposal History
================

-   11/5/19:

    -   [Slack poll
        results](https://cfb-public.slack.com/archives/CFZDU3VJ9/p1572408681138400):

        -   5: Maria, Joel (2)

        -   4: Franco, Jesse, Pauline, Frank (4)

    -   PROPOSAL ACCEPTED

    -   DECISION: Add amendments above:

        -   Pin the poll in Slack.

        -   After a poll has completed, remove the pin.

        -   If a proposal has been accepted, the document title will be changed
            from PROPOSAL to DECISION.

-   10/29/19:

    -   Timeline stated in slack.

    -   When decision is being debated in-person, the points in the discussion
        should be documented somewhere. If it’s just via Slack, no official
        proposal document, it should be in comments on a thread on the proposal.

    -   DECISION: Go through full process and post poll on Slack: 8 voted 5, 1
        voted 4

-   10/28/19:

    -   Maria shared document created for Safe Water Project as example.


Useful Resources
================

-   [Seeds for Change - Consensus Decision Making: A Short
    Guide](https://www.seedsforchange.org.uk/shortconsensus)

-   *Emergent Strategy* (pp 232-233) by adrienne maree brown

-   [Fist to Five Consensus Building
    Process](https://nonprofitgp.files.wordpress.com/2016/05/h03-2016-05-oah-fist-to-five-consensus-building.pdf)

